# IGV-Lab-Tutorial

In this repository are the files we are going to be using to experiment with the Integrative Genomics Viewer (IGV).

Before we begin, please clone this repository to your computer and make sure IGV is downloaded and installed. You can find the download instructions here: https://software.broadinstitute.org/software/igv/download

There is also an online application for IGV that does not require a login, Java, or download. However, this tutorial will use the downloaded program and not the online website. I mention it here in case it is useful to you in the future.

For future reference, IGV has a very extensive online guide that covers what the program can do. You can find it here: https://software.broadinstitute.org/software/igv/UserGuide

IGV also has a YouTube channel with videos explaining various functions of the program. You can find their page here: https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCb5W5WqauDOwubZHb-IA_rA

## Files in this repository

There are six files in this repository, plus the README file. We will be using all of these to make tracks in IGV. Here is an overview of what they are.

assembly-map-sorted.bam -- a sorted BAM file generated by minimap2 and samtools; this file was created by using minimap2 to map the assembled transcriptome created by Viraj to the Niphates erecta mitochondrial genome, and samtools was used to convert the file from .sam to .bam, sort it, and create the index. This file type - .bam - is a binary file meant to be read by programs and if you open it in something like TextEditor looks like gibberish.

assembly-map-sorted.bam.bai - a sorted BAM index file generated by minimap2 and samtools; IGV requires what's called a sorted BAM file and a sorted index file to view mapped assemblies. The .bam files contains the mapped reads/assembly, while the .bam.bai is an index of those mapped reads/assembly. The index functions as a table of contents for the .bam file to help the program find what it needs in the .bam file.

erecta-transcripts-sorted.bam - a BAM file generated by bowtie2 and samtools; this file was created by using bowtie2 to map the raw reads generated during sequencing to the Niphates erecta mitochondrial genome, and samtools was used to convert the file from .sam to .bam, sort it, and creat the index. This file type - .bam - is a binary file meant to be read by programs and if you open it in something like TextEditor looks like gibberish.

erecta-transcripts-sorted.bam.bai - a sorted BAM index file generated by bowtie2 and samtools; IGV requires what's called a sorted BAM file and a sorted index file to view mapped assemblies. The .bam files contains the mapped reads/assembly, while the .bam.bai is an index of those mapped reads/assembly. The index functions as a table of contents for the .bam file to help the program find what it needs in the .bam file.

erecta-annotation.bed -- a .BED file that contains the genes and features present in the Niphates erecta mitochondrial genome. An annotation file is optional when using IGV, is very helpful when you want to see how your reads/assembly correspond to genes and other genomic features.

nerectamt.all.fa -- a FASTA file that contains the sequence of the Niphates erecta mitochondrial genome. This is REQUIRED when viewing things in IGV.



